23/topic recommendations (#383)
vacp2p/rfc: content/docs/rfcs/23/README.md

---
slug: 23
title: 23/WAKU2-TOPICS
name: Waku v2 Topic Usage Recommendations
status: draft
editor: Oskar Thoren <oskar@status.im>
contributors:
---

> This document outlines recommended usage of topics in Waku v2. In [10/WAKU2 spec](/spec/10) there are two types of topics:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This document outlines recommended usage of topics in Waku v2.
In [10/WAKU2 spec](/spec/10) there are two types of topics:
```

> - Pubsub topics, used for routing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- PubSub topics, used for routing
```

Author: done across board

- Content topics, used for content-based filtering

## Pubsub topics

> Pubsub topics are used for routing of mesages, see [11/WAKU2-RELAY](/spec/11) spec for more details of how this routing works.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
PubSub topics are used for routing of messages, see [11/WAKU2-RELAY](/spec/11) spec for more details of how this routing works.
```

As written in [10/WAKU2 spec](/spec/10) there is a default Pubsub topic:

`/waku/2/default-waku/proto`

This indicates that

1) It relates to the Waku problem domain
2) version is 2

> 3) name indicates what is being exchanged, which in this case is WakuMessages over a single topic and

Reviewer: I think it would be clearer if the terminology used in the description matches the terminology used in the topic.

"default-waku" means "waku message over a single topic". Instead, the name could be "waku-message" or `waku-message/default`.

Also, "default" is in the name so the explanation could become "name indicates what is being exchanged, which in this case is WakuMessages over a single **default** topic".

Author: I don't think it is worth it to change the default topic name from `/waku/2/default-waku/proto` considering it captures essence of `/waku/2/{topic-name}/{encoding}` and we have it deployed everywhere.

I don't know what you mean by terminology matching description, this is just an example and showing what each field is. General format is section below.

Author: reworded a bit 3) `default-waku` indicates that it is the default topic for exchanging exchanging WakuMessages

4) that the data in PubSub field is protobuf (unlike Eth2 where it is `ssz_snappy`) as determined by WakuMessage.

> The default PubSub topic SHOULD be used for all protocols.

Reviewer 2: I would probably move this section closer to

### Why use a single PubSub topic by default?

(or the other way around, or a link)

As I found it a bit confusing that first we give options (proto/szz_snappy), and then immediately tell them not to use them without an explanation, so I would probably get the two a bit closer so that it's easier to understand why you would want to stick to the default topic.

Author: Good point, moved section up earlier

However, in certain situations other topics MAY be used.

### Pubsub topic format

PubSub topics SHOULD follow the folloing structure:

> `/waku/2/TopicName/Encoding`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`/waku/2/topic-name/encoding`
```

Our default pubsub topic uses kebab casing, then best if we describe its format using kebab casing too.

Author: done but differently

This namespaced structure makes things like compatibility and discoverability and automatic handling of new topics easier.
For example, if the encoding of the payload is changed, compression is introduced, etc.

For more on this format of PubSub topics, see [Ethereum 2 P2P spec](https://github.com/ethereum/eth2.0-specs/blob/dev/specs/phase0/p2p-interface.md#topics-and-messages) where inspiration for this format was taken from.

### Separation of two applications example

Let's say we have some M2M topic that is heavy and experience a lot of heavy traffic and a Status Network one. This can be segregated into:

```
/waku/2/waku-status/proto
/waku/2/waku-walletconnect/proto
```

> This indicates that they are WakuMessages but for different domains completely.

Reviewer: Which parts indicate that they are waku messages? `/waku` or `waku-`?
Also, the default pubsub topic already indicate that they are waku messages, do we need the redundancy?

Author: `waku-` in this case. I don't think we expect any non WakuMessages to be passed over `/waku`, but it MAY happen in the future.

Author: I suppose it is a MUST so let's simplify this https://rfc.vac.dev/spec/11/#message-fields Thanks!

> ### Topic sharding example

Reviewer: Is that for PubSub topics or content topics? Either way, please specify.

Author: they are all under pubsub header.

> Topic sharding is currently not supported by default, but is planned for the future in order to deal with increased network traffic. Here's a sketch for what this might look like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Topic sharding is currently not supported by default, but is planned for the future in order to deal with increased network traffic.
Here's a sketch for what this might look like:
```

```

> waku/2/waku-9_shard-0/proto

Reviewer 3: Are we going to enforce this namespace structure for sharded topics i.e., `<topic>_shared-<shard#>` or is it just an example?

Author: For now it is an example, but something like this. Did you have something specific in mind here?

Reviewer 3: For the sake of privacy and anonymity I suggest to not to enforce any structure on the sharded topics, because e.g., the above structure reveals the number of shards and the level of k-anonymity (while k can stay obscure for higher level of privacy). Nevertheless, one may want to be explicit about the number of shards, and that is ok as long as it is the decision of the upper-level protocols but not mandated by our namespace structure.

Author: Made explicit that this is an example

> waku/2/waku-9_shard-0/proto

Reviewer: ```suggestion
/waku/2/waku-9-shard-0/proto
```
Or is the mix of kebab and snake case on purpose?

...
waku/2/waku-9_shard-9/proto
```

This indicates explicitly that the network traffic has been partitioned into 10 buckets.

### Compression example

Not yet implemented, but would be easy to add with:

> `/waku/2/default-waku/proto_snappy`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`/waku/2/default-waku/proto_snappy`
```
Why mixing snake and kebab case? Consistency across the field would make easier to not end up with `proto_zip` and `proto-zip` protocols.

Author: proto_snappy is what was used in eth2, this is arbitrary and an example.

### Why use a single PubSub topic by default?

> Using a single PubSub topic ensures a connected network, as well some degree of metadata protection. See [section on Anonymity/Unlinkability](/spec/10/#anonymity--unlinkability).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using a single PubSub topic ensures a connected network, as well some degree of metadata protection.
See [section on Anonymity/Unlinkability](/spec/10/#anonymity--unlinkability).
```

If you use another PubSub topic, be aware that metadata protection might be weakened,

> and other nodes in the network might not subscribe or store messages for your given Pubsub topic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and other nodes in the network might not subscribe or store messages for your given PubSub topic.
```

Should we explain a bit more the possible functional impact?
- Hinder discovery of your nodes
- Impedes access to messages under your topic, whether it's relay (messages are not forwarded to non-subscribed nodes) or store (messages not stored on custom topic by default).

Author: elaborated

> This means you are likely to have to run your own full nodes which may make your application less robust.

Reviewer 3: Just as a suggestion, instead of having one default topic that fixates the domain and the TopicName, we can have one default pusub topic domain which is `waku` and let any `TopicName`s get routed under the waku domain. The reason for this suggestion is to accommodate cases like capability discovery for which there is a need for a separate pubsub topic (if I am not mistaken @jm-clius) and at the same time the capabilities are to be stored by the store nodes as well.

Author: > and let any TopicNames get routed under the waku domain. 

Not quite sure how this would work with GossipSub?

> Capabilities topic

Good point, I think we can just have this as a separate topic and then make it a recommendation for nodes to listen to it, WDYT?

Author: To be added once capabilities are more specced out, not needed in this PR

## Content topics

> The other type of topic that exists in Waku v2 is content topics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The other type of topic that exists in Waku v2 is content topic.
```

This is used for content based filtering.

> See [14/WAKU2-MESSAGE spec](/spec/14) for where this is specified.

Reviewer 2: Links are inconsistent, sometimes is absolute, sometimes is relative

Author: All links that are to rfc.vac.dev are relative, whereas all other (external) links are absolute. I couldn't find any case where this wasn't the case.

Reviewer 2: Just below this line, line 99 has 2 absolute links to rfc.vac.dev:
```
[12/WAKU2-FILTER](https://rfc.vac.dev/spec/12/) and [13/WAKU2-STORE](https://rfc.vac.dev/spec/13/) are used.
```

Or those should stay absolute?

Note that this doesn't impact routing of messages between relaying nodes,
but it does impact how request/reply protocols such as 
[12/WAKU2-FILTER](https://rfc.vac.dev/spec/12/) and [13/WAKU2-STORE](https://rfc.vac.dev/spec/13/) are used.

This is especially useful for nodes that have limited bandwidth,

> and only want to pull down messages that match this filter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and only want to pull down messages that match a given content topic.
```

> Since all messages are relayed regardless of content topic, you MAY use any content topic you wish without impacting how messages are relayed.

Reviewer 2: All messages are relayed, provided that the node is running the relay protocol? I would probably specify, as it reads that all messages are relayed no matter what (which might be the case, in that case there's no ambiguity)

Author: clarified

### Content topic format

The format of content topics is as follows:

> `/waku/2/ContentTopic/Encoding`

Reviewer 2: Regarding the format of content topic,

First, `/waku/2/`, is it not redundant? given that I am using already the `/waku/2/` topic, do I need to specify as well in the content topic that I am using waku-2? or should it not be given?

Next,
I don't know exactly how it's going to be used so I might be misunderstanding something,
but it seems to me that the last element (i.e `/proto` or `/rlp`) might be also redundant or possibly create some clashes.  

I have partial understanding, so some of the assumptions might be wrong and invalidate some of the scenarios:

I am not 100% sure what `/proto` refers to, so I'll add both cases that I could think of:

### `/proto` refers to `WakuMessage`

So `/proto` means that we are exchanging `WakuMessage`, in which case, is it not redundant as it's already specified at the topic level (the last `/proto`)?

### `/proto` refers to my custom application level protobuf 

Say we are in the old status days, we would use instead `/transit`, just to make it simpler to think about it, if that's the case though, it would not make my application able to speak with any other transit application (or protobuf), so I'd be sort of "squatting" on this very generic content topic, but another developer who uses transit might potentially receive my messages creating clashes.

Overall it seems like as an application developer, I'd rather have more fields to customize, something like:

`/status-chat-application/1/ContentTopic/proto`

so a format like:

`/{application-name}/{version-of-the-application}/{content-topic}/{encoding}`

It's also true that I can stick the applicationID in the content topic to avoid clashes, but looks like less natural:

`/waku/2/{application-name}-{content-topic}/{encoding}`

In any case, it's probably worth explaining or being a bit more prescriptive on how multiple applications are supposed to use content-topics, as we encourage everyone to use the same `topic`, then we might want to be a bit prescriptive on how to use content topic to avoid clashes and/or mentioning that clashes between applications are possible.

Sorry if I misunderstand something, I had a look at the docs and try to cover all the cases I could think of, but I might be completely off point

Reviewer 4: This makes a lot of sense, @cammellos . I especially like the `/{application-name}/{version-of-the-application}/{content-topic}/{encoding}`  format for content.

It also works well for our existing paradigms. For example, if we (roughly) define a Waku v2 application as "anything that defines the `payload` of a WakuMessage", the v1 <> v2 bridge would also be considered an application. In this case the content topic would be `/waku/1/{v1-topic}/rlp`. This clears up the terminology and makes it explicit that `/waku/1` is an application running over `/waku/2`.

`{encoding}` for a content topic would then be the serialization/encoding scheme of the [`WakuMessage.payload`](https://rfc.vac.dev/spec/14/#payloads), while
`{encoding}` for a PubSub topic would be the serialization/encoding scheme of the PubSub [`RPC.Message.data`](https://rfc.vac.dev/spec/11/#protobuf-definitions).

Reviewer: Also please the casing that you expect the content topic to use (e.g. kebab case).

Author: Great feedback, thanks @cammellos. Agree @jm-clius 

Addressed

> The name of ContentTopic is application-specific. As an example, here's the content topic used for an upcoming testnet:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The name of ContentTopic is application-specific.
As an example, here's the content topic used for an upcoming testnet:
```

Back to https://github.com/vacp2p/rfc/pull/383/files#r640300187, maybe it is worth naming the field. Are you saying that the second to last field is called "name"?

`/waku/2/huilong/proto`

## Differences with Waku v1

In [6/WAKU1](/spec/6) there is no actual routing.
All messages are sent to all other nodes.
This means that we are implicitly using the same PubSub topic that would be something like:

```
/waku/1/default-waku/rlp
```

Topics in Waku v1 correspond to Content Topics in Waku v2.

### Bridging Waku v1 and Waku v2

To bridge Waku v1 and Waku v2 we have a [15/WAKU-BRIDGE](/spec/15).
For mapping Waku v1 topics to Waku v2 content topics,
the following structure is used:

```

> /waku/v1/<4bytes-waku-v1-topic>/rlp

Reviewer 4: Thanks for specifying this. Not yet implemented as such for bridge, but see https://github.com/status-im/nim-waku/issues/576.

Curious why the encoding here is set to `rlp`, as the v1 payload would have been encapsulated in a proto-encoded v2 message? I guess it's a matter of interpretation.

```suggestion
/waku/1/<4bytes-waku-v1-topic>/rlp
```

Author: Ah good point, /proto would probably be more accurate here

> /waku/v1/<4bytes-waku-v1-topic>/rlp

Reviewer 2: Is this a content topic or a topic?
Probably it would be good to specify

Author: Done

```

This creates a direct mapping between the two protocols.
For example:

```

> /waku/v1/0x007f80ff/rlp

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
/waku/1/0x007f80ff/rlp
```

### Compression example

Not yet implemented, but would be easy to add with:

`/waku/2/default-waku/proto_snappy`

## Content topics

The other type of topic that exists in Waku v2 is a content topic.
This is used for content based filtering.
See [14/WAKU2-MESSAGE spec](/spec/14) for where this is specified.
Note that this doesn't impact routing of messages between relaying nodes,
but it does impact how request/reply protocols such as 
[12/WAKU2-FILTER](https://rfc.vac.dev/spec/12/) and [13/WAKU2-STORE](https://rfc.vac.dev/spec/13/) are used.

This is especially useful for nodes that have limited bandwidth,
and only want to pull down messages that match this given content topic.

Since all messages are relayed using the relay protocol regardless of content topic,
you MAY use any content topic you wish without impacting how messages are relayed.

### Content topic format

The format for content topics is as follows:

`/{application-name}/{version-of-the-application}/{content-topic-name}/{encoding}`

The name of a content topic is application-specific.
As an example, here's the content topic used for an upcoming testnet:

`/waku/2/huilong/proto`

> <!-- TODO Consider if this should be /toychat/2/huilong/proto -->

Reviewer 4: I think it should. Will change in `chat2` application. @D4nte

> `/waku/2/huilong/proto`
> 
> <!-- TODO Consider if this should be /toychat/2/huilong/proto -->

Author: ```suggestion
`/toychat/2/huilong/proto`
```
